Fungal infections have devastated agricultural crops and contributed to severe diseases in humans and animals (Fisher et al., 2012). Plant pathogenic fungi can destroy plant tissues and result in great crop losses.Animal fungal pathogens can cause systemic and opportunistic mycoses, with two ongoing epidemics that have caused millions of deaths of amphibians (O’Hanlon et al., 2018)and bats(Kramer et al., 2019). In humans, life-threatening fungal diseases have been among the most challenging medical problems. Indeed,fungal infestations continue to rise and pose a significant threat to all plants and animals, including humans.However, fungal infections are difficult to treat, partly because fungi are evolutionarily closely related to plants and animals and many of them are not obligate pathogens but arise through adaptations from pre-existing characteristics of non-parasitic lifestyles. The mechanisms underlying such adaptations are poorly understood. Most fungal pathogens have two or more lifestyles, and they can switch to pathogenic mode under specifice nvironmental cues (Gauthier, 2015). Therefore, understanding fungal lifestyle transition is of great signif-icance to uncover the mechanisms underlying fungal pathogenesis. For instance,Magnaporthe oryzaecancause rice blast. Its pathogenesis starts from the attachment of conidia to plant surface and followed byconidia germination and penetration (Ebbole, 2007).M. oryzaehas been a model for understanding plant-fungal interactions. The dimorphic fungusCandida albicansis a commensal of the mammalian myco-flora and the most common opportunistic pathogen of humans. Its ability to transition between yeast and hyphal form is essential for pathogenesis (Mayer et al., 2013). The insect pathogen Metarhizium anisopliae grows naturally in soils as a saprophyte and causes disease in various insects initiated by conidia germina-tion after the adhesion of conidia to the host cuticle (Aw and Hue, 2017). However, most fungal lifestyle transitions are difficult to determine. Among the pathogenic fungi, the nematode-trapping fungi (NTF)are unique in that they have evolved specialized morphological adaptations to capture nematodes. The formation of trapping devices is the key indicator of their lifestyle transition from saprophytes to predators and thus makes them good models for studying the mechanisms of fungal pathogenesis and adaptation(Abad et al., 2008; Yang et al., 2011, 2012; Zhang and Hyde, 2014).
Four representative types of traps are known among the nematode-trapping fungi, including constrictingring (CR), adhesive network (AN), adhesive column (AC), and adhesive knob (AK). In CR, when triggered, thethree curved ring cells swell rapidly inward and lasso the victim quickly using mechanical force (Figure 1A).Instead of mechanical forces, fungi with AN form interlocking loops by growing branching hyphae andfusing with the parent hyphae to develop adhesive networks to capture nematodes (Figure 1B). Fungiwith the AC device form a string of cells with adhesive surfaces (Figure 1C). Lastly, AK is an erect stalkwith an adhesive bulb at the end (Figure 1D).Of the four types of nematode-trapping devices, two have had their representative genomes sequenced,includingArthrobotrys oligosporarepresenting AN (Ji et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2011)andMonacrosporiumhaptotylumrepresenting AK (Meerupati et al., 2013). Here we sequenced the genomes of three additionalspecies, includingDrechslerella brochopaga(representing CR),Dactylellina cionopagum(representingAC), andDactylellina entomopaga(representing AK). In addition, a close relative to NTF but without a trap-ping device,Dactylella cylindrospora, was also sequenced for comparative analyses. The combined anal-ysis showed that the expansion of genes encoding adhesion proteins (APs) among fungal genomes andtheir up-regulation during the fungal lifestyle change were responsible for the increasing adhesivenesson trap surface, driving the evolution of the nematode-trapping fungi and their adaptation in capturingnematodes using different trapping devices. The expansion of adhesion gene families has likely played very important roles during the evolution and adaptation of the predatory lifestyle by the NTF. They func-tion in capturing nematodes, ensuring their lifestyle transition from saprophytes to predators and patho-gens. Our results provide insights into the mechanisms underlying fungal pathogenesis and adaptation.RESULTSThe four types of nematode traps have distinct features. Morphologically, CRs are most complicated (Xue-MeiNiu and Zhang, 2011; Yang et al., 2007). They immobilize nematodes actively and mechanically by rapidswelling of three highly ordered ring cells (Figure 1E). In contrast, ANs use complex three-dimensionaladhesive nets to capture nematodes (Figure 1F), whereas ACs and AKs use two-dimensional adhesive col-umns and simple adhesive knobs, respectively (Figures 1G and 1H). Compared with the adhesive traps, oneof the limiting factors for CRs is nematode size. Fungi with different-sized CRs were likely selected to cap-ture nematodes of various sizes (Figure 1I). However, nematodes can escape CR even after entrapment(Figure 1J). Among the four types of traps, AK is the most efficient where a single knob is often sufficientto capture large nematodes (Figure 1H).Genome Sequencing of Nematode-Trapping FungiThe estimated genome sizes of the sequenced NTF ranged from 35 to 43 Mb (Table S1). The GC contentswere about 44%–50% (Table S2). Their gene models, ranging from 9,924 to 10,716 (Table S3), were pre-dicted by combiningab initioprediction and evidence-based searches. The average lengths of protein-coding genes were about 1.5 kb, and each gene contained averages of 2.8–3 exons, with 2,500–3,000 genescontaining only one single exon each. About 60% of the inferred proteins had matches in public databases. Phylogenomic Analysis Reveals Simplification of Trapping DevicesPrevious research based on fossil records and phylogenetic analyses suggested potential evolutionaryrelationships among various nematode-trapping devices (Yang et al., 2007, 2012). To further study thepathogenic adaptation of the nematode-trapping fungi at the genome level, the phylogenomic relation-ships among the representative NTF were constructed using the maximum likelihood method based on395 conserved genes coding for orthologous proteins. These 395 genes were conserved across all the16 genomes used in phylogenomic analysis (Table S4), including the 5 representative NTF, the close rela-tiveD. cylindrospora, 7 other pathogenic fungi, and 3 saprophytes. These orthologous genes were mostlyinvolved in house-keeping functions.Saccharomyces cerevisiaewas used as the outgroup member. Thebootstrap analysis based on 1,000 replications strongly supported the tree topology (Figure 2A). The phy-logenomic tree showed that the NTF and their close relativeDactylella cylindrosporabelonged to a mono-phyletic clade and suggested an unambiguous trend during the evolution of trapping devices. Specifically,the fungal nematode-trapping ability originated from a saprophytic ancestor of Orbiliomycetes. AfterD. cylindrosporasplit at around 339 Myr ago, the organisms with the active mechanical trap (CR) emergedfirst, followed by those with passive adhesive traps, including the fungi developing complex 3-D adhesivenetworks, adhesive columns, and adhesive knobs evolved in sequence.The derived phylogenomic tree suggested that the nematode-trapping fungi underwent morphologicalsimplification in trapping devices through evolution. However, the morphological simplification of trapshas not weakened the nematode-capturing capacity.Onthecontrary,onesingleadhesiveknobcanimmo-bilize nematodes of different sizes, whereas each constricting ring can only catch nematodes of a specific-size category (Figure 1H). Ultrastructural studies revealed that the adhesive trapping devices capturednematodes by means of an adhesive layer covering the trap surfaces (Belder et al., 1996; Tunlid et al.,1991). Specifically, the adhesion of nematodes to fungal traps as well as the nematode-trapping efficiencysignificantly decreased when the adhesive layer was denatured (Tunlid et al., 1991).Ultrastructural Measurements Reveal Increase of Adhesiveness on Trap SurfacesWe measured the thickness of the adhesive layers on trap surfaces of the examined species. We found noadhesive layer on cells of CRs or on un-induced hyphae of all trapping devices (Figure 2B). On the contrary,different adhesive traps produced adhesive layers that differed greatly in their thickness. Specifically, a 0.2-to 0.4-mm-thick layer matrix was observed on the surface of ANs (Figure 2C), and about 1-2mmforACs(Fig-ure 2D) and up to 20mmforAKs(Figure 2E), respectively. Thus, the combined results based on ultrastruc-tural observations and the phylogenomic tree suggested that increasing adhesiveness on trap surfaces was a key innovation allowing NTF to capture nematodes with a high efficiency even with morphologicallysimple trapping devices.Comparative Genomic Analyses Reveal Expansion of Genes Encoding Adhesion ProteinsTo further investigate the underlying genetic basis for pathogenic adaptation of the nematode-trapping fungi,genomic and comparative genomic analyses were performed. Genomic analysis showed that more than 40% ofprotein-coding genes belonged to multi-gene families (Table S5). The results revealed that selected groups ofgenes have significantly expanded in NTF genomes. Specifically, comparative analyses identified that 12 multi-gene families and 23 gene domains have significantly expanded (p < 0.05) in NTF genomes (Figures S1AandS1B). Interestingly, nine of the expanded multi-gene families lack significant matches in public databases, sug-gesting the existence of potentially novel genetic pathways underlying pathogenesis of NTF. Examples of theexpanded gene families include lectins and proteins containing the yeast cell wall-integrity and stress-responsecomponent (WSC) domain and the Winged-helix (WH) domain. Lectins have been previously proposed tomediate the interactions between several parasitic fungi (including NTF) and their hosts (Rosen et al., 1996). Pro-teins containing the WSC domain serve as cell wall sensors (Dupres et al., 2009)andareinvolvedinfungalad-hesions (Linder and Gustafsson, 2008). Proteins containing the WH domain play very important roles during DNAbinding of transcription factors (Lilley, 1995).Previous studies have identified a diversity of genes and gene families related to fungal pathogenicity(Meerupati et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2011). Comparative analysis showed that some of them significantly expanded in NTF genomes (Figure S1C). For example, three gene families, including subtilisins, adhesion proteins, and polygalacturonases, showed continuous expansion during the evolution of progressivelysimplified trapping devices (Figure 3A). Subtilisins are known to play important roles in the pathogenicityof carnivorous fungi (Ahman et al., 2002). The polygalacturonases degrade lectin networks comprising cell walls and play an important role in fungal pathogenicity to plants (D’Ovidio et al., 2004). And, adhesionproteins help fungi adhere to a diversity of surfaces (Ebbole, 2007; Mayer et al., 2013).Ultrastructural studies showed that the trapping devices acquired a progressively thicker adhesive layer on the surface of trap cells after they evolved the ability to trap nematodes by adhesion. In the NTF genomes,the genes encoding adhesion proteins were significantly expanded and the expansion paralleled the increasing adhesiveness of the trapping devices (Figures 3A and 3B). Specifically, there are 11 adhesion protein-encoding genes inD. brochopaga(CR), 16 inA. oligospora(AN), 21 inD. cionopagum(AC), and31 inD. entomopaga(AK). There is a positive correlation between the number of adhesion proteins and the thickness of adhesive layer of corresponding trapping devices. Genes Encoding Adhesion Proteins Show Consistent Up-RegulationsTo further investigate the relationship between adhesion proteins and trap induction of NTF, quantitativeRT-PCR was performed to measure the gene expression levels of APs during the trap formation wheninduced by live nematodes. Gene expression analysis showed that the up-regulation of APs during trap in-duction was also consistent with both expansion of APs in genomes and the increasing adhesiveness oftraps. Specifically, 7 genes encoding APs were significantly up-regulated (3 replicates, fold change >2)during induction of ANs and 10 were significantly up-regulated in ACs, whereas 23 were significantly up-regulatedduringinductionofAKs(Figure 3B). In contrast, no APs were found up-regulated during theinduction of CRs, which capture the nematodes by means of mechanical forces instead of adhesive layers.The positive correlation also exists between the thickness of adhesive layer and the numbers of up-regu-lated adhesion proteins during trap induction. Taken together, the nematode-trapping fungi using CRshave the least number of APs encoded in genome, whereas the fungi using AKs have most APs and thethickest adhesive layer on trap surface.Our previous work showed that disruption of adhesion-related gene reduced the production of adhesivelayer on trap surface ofA. oligosporaand significantly decreased its ability to capture nematodes (Lianget al., 2015). The results suggest that the significant expansion of APs along the NTF lineage is likely respon-sible for the gradual thickening of the adhesive layers. Given that capturing the nematodes with varioustraps is the most crucial step of infection by NTF, the number of APs and their regulation represent akey factor in shaping the evolution of various traps and achieving corresponding adaptation.Species-Specific Genes Emerged in Different GenomesComparative analysis has also identified large numbers of species-specific genes among NTF genomes(Figure 2A). Interestingly, the species-specific genes were found enriched in many of the expanded path-ogenicity-related gene families (Figure S2). Compared with the non-species-specific genes that are sharedwith non-NTF species, the species-specific genespossessed a few marked features. For example, theaverage length of proteins encoded by species-specific genes was 332 amino acids, much shorter thanthat of non-species-specific genes (509 amino acids). Second, a large proportion (72%) of the species-spe-cific genes had no homologous matches in public databases. Third, there were fewer paralogs in species-specific genes than in other genes. Specifically, in non-species-specific genes, an average of 47% of theprotein-encoding genes belonged to multi-gene families (Table S5), whereas in species-specific genes,the average number was 19%. Indeed, less than 3% of species-specific genes belonged to 12 large clustersconsisting of more than 10 paralogs. The results on species-specific genes suggest that their expansionsare likely related to gene diversification that contributes significantly to functional innovation of the nem-atode-trapping fungi.Enrichment analysis showed that the species-specific genes among the NTF differed in gene expansionpatterns. For example, all the species-specific genes of NTF are enriched in genes encoding subtilisin-like proteins, butD. brochopagahas much fewer coding genes than those developing adhesive trappingdevices (Figure 3C).D. cionopagum,D. entomopaga,and M. haptotylum with morphologically simpleadhesive traps are enriched in genes encoding subtilisins and peptidases, suggesting important roles ofproteolysis in their infectious attack. InA. oligospora, the genes coding for GAS proteins are highlyenriched. GAS proteins bind to the plasma membrane through a lipid anchor and are involved in cellwall synthesis and cell signaling (van Zanten et al., 2009; Verghese et al., 2006). In particular,M. haptotylumcontains 19 genes with WSC domains, which is consistent with trap adhesion being veryimportant for adhesive knobs.Repeat-Induced Point Mutations Involved in Gene ExpansionGene-family expansion can be caused by gene duplication and is recognized as one of the main mechanisms ofadaptive innovation (Gladieux et al., 2014). However, the underlying mechanism for gene duplication and diver-sity is often unknown. Genomic analyses revealed that less than 2% of NTF genomes consisted of repetitive se-quences (Table S2), even lower than that in the model filamentous fungusNeurospora crassa(Galagan et al.,2003; Selker, 1990) in which the repeat-induced point mutation (RIP) has been considered as responsible forits low percentage of repetitive sequences. RIP is a homology-based process that mutates repetitive sequences.Thus, RIP can significantly impact genome evolution by slowing the creation of new genes through genomicduplication (Galagan and Selker, 2004). Here, we calculated RIP indices to determine whether RIP contributedto the evolution of NTF genomes. By using the default settings (Hane and Oliver, 2008), positive RIP responses were detected in various genomic regions (Table S6), including multi-gene families and repetitive sequences. Inaddition, consistent with the actions that RIP mutates duplicated sequences with greater than about 80% nucle-otide similarity (Galagan et al., 2003), there are very few highly similar genes within the sequenced NTF genomes(Figure 3D). In particular, homologous genes with more than 70% similarity are almost absent from NTF ge-nomes, whereas there are many such genes inS. cerevisiae. In addition, the RIP process requires theRID1gene (Freitag et al., 2002). The homologous gene ofRID1has been found in all the NTF genomes. Furthermore,DNA methylation is usually associated with RIP (Singer et al., 1995). We performed a DNA methylation analysis ofthe whole genome ofA. oligospora and identified a total of 737 5-mC positions, and positive RIP responses weredetected in 705 of them. The results suggest that the RIP mechanism has had a profound impact on gene expan-sion in nematode-trapping fungi and contributes significantly to their pathogenic adaptation.DISCUSSIONLifestyle transition is a fundamental property of fungi in their responses to environmental changes. For nema-tode-trapping fungi, nitrogen deficiency is a common inducer for developing traps to capture nematodes(Nordbring-Hertz et al., 2006). Through evolution, various trapping devices likely emerged to deal with nitrogendeficiency. As the earliest emerged and morphologically the most complicated trapping device, CRs immobilizenematodes actively and mechanically by rapid swelling of three highly ordered ring cells. However, large nem-atodes cannot enter CRs and small nematodes can pass through the traps without triggering any response (Fig-ure 1J). In contrast, the passive adhesive traps capture nematodes by means of adhesive layers on the surfaces oftrap cells and can capture nematodes using a single adhesive knob (Figure 1H). Therefore, the simplification oftraps has not reduced trapping efficiency but instead has likely provided competitive advantages. However, thesimplification of trapping structures may have caused a reduction in the contact area between the fungi andnematodes, thus increasing the requirement for surface adhesiveness. The observed continuous expansion of adhesion proteins and the consequent thickening of adhesive layers are consistent with the above hypothesis to ensure capture efficiency with even simple trap structures (Figure 4). In addition, the continuous expansionof subtilisins and other related genes could enhance the ability of the fungi to penetrate and digest the nema-todes after the nematodes are captured.Gene duplication and divergence are important mechanisms for adaptive innovation (Gladieux et al., 2014; Hit-tinger and Carroll, 2007). Among NTF genomes, 44% of protein-coding genes belong to multi-gene families.Our analyses showed that trap evolution was associated with significant expansion of multiple gene familiesand many of them may function in pathogenicity of the nematode-trapping fungi. RIP plays important roles ingene duplication. Positive RIP responses have been detected in repetitive sequences, multi-gene families, spe-cies-specific genes, and DNA methylation positions in NTF genomes. InS. cerevisiae, more than 30% of genepairs have more than 50% sequence identities, whereas in nematode-trapping fungi, the highly similar genesare almost completely absent (Figure 3D). Genomic rearrangement can also result in gene duplication. Syntenicanalyses can be used for identification of genomic rearrangement. An example of genomic inversion among thesequenced NTF is shown inFigure S4. Genomic rearrangement could also facilitate the emergence of species-specific genes. Indeed, some of the species-specific genes are highly enriched in certain genomic regions. Thelow sequence similarity in gene families, large numbers of species-specific genes and few paralogs in species-specific genes suggest functional diversification following gene duplication. Other than the nematode-trappingfungi, other fungal pathogens (Table S5) also showed patterns of gene expansion and accumulation of species-specific genes. For example, search against PHI (pathogen-host interaction) gene database (Winnenburg et al.,2008) identified that the nematode-trapping fungi share more putative PHI genes with fungal pathogens(including animal and plant pathogens,Table S4) than with saprophytes (101 versus 19). Interestingly, they sharemore putative PHI genes with plant fungal pathogens (includingM. oryzae) than with animal fungal pathogens(37 versus 23). The result is consistent with previous observations showing the putative PHI genes being enrichedin plant-pathogen interaction and the important roles of poly-galacturonases in fungal pathogenicity to plants.For most fungal pathogens, attachment to host tissues is among the most crucial stage for successful infec-tion. These attachments are generally mediated by cell surface adhesion molecules (Aw and Hue, 2017; Eb-bole, 2007; Mayer et al., 2013). These molecules play critical roles in the establishment of fungal infectionsof plants, animals, and humans. In this study, we demonstrated that expansion of genes encoding adhesion proteins in nematode-trapping fungi was positively correlated with the thickening of adhesive layers on thesurface of trapping devices during lifestyle transitions, which ensure high efficiency for capturing nematodepreys using simplified trapping devices (Figure 4). Expansion of adhesion proteins is thus a key driver in theevolution of nematode-trapping fungi and their trapping devices. Our results suggest that adhesion Limitations of the Study Our analyses indicated a likely process for the evolution of nematode trapping devices and suggested the possible mechanisms underlying trapping device simplification while enhancing nematode trapping efficiencies. However, given the prevalence of RIP, how exactly the gene family expansion escaped RIP during evolution remains unknown. Similarly, previous studies have shown that disruption of adhesion-related gene reduced the adhesive layers of trap surface of A. oligospora, and how the adhesion genes interact to control the thickness of the adhesive layers among various NTF requires further investigation. In ourinvestigations, we also identified the expansion of several other gene families such as subtilisins and poly-galacturonases involved in the degradations of proteins and other macromolecules. Their roles in trappingdevice evolution and NTF adaptation, including how they interact with adhesion proteins to ensurecapturing capacity, remain to be investigated.